README.md, before:

# statuslist-agent

The StatusList Agent serves status-lists according to the following specifications:

- IETF Token Status Lists: <https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/draft-ietf-oauth-status-list/11/>
- W3C BitstringStatus: <https://www.w3.org/TR/vc-bitstring-status-list/>
- W3C StatusList: <https://github.com/w3c/vc-bitstring-status-list> (an older version of the above)

The agent connects to a PostGreSQL database to potentially store the revocation or suspension state of arbitrary credentials (not implemented yet).

## Installation

Install the agent using yarn:

```bash
yarn install
```

Then configure the tool using the supplied `.env.example`. The following options are supported:

- DB_HOST: database host
- DB_USER: database user
- DB_PASSWORD: database user password
- DB_NAME: database name
- DB_SCHEMA: schema name
- KEY_FILE: local file defining the status agent did:web key data
- PORT: port to listen to
- LISTEN_ADDRESS: interface to listen to
- BASEURL: base url for the agent
- APP_KEY: key-type + private key for the agent key, OR a did or alias into the database identifier table
- APP_DID: statuslist agent did name, if APP_KEY represents the key-type + private key
- BEARER_TOKEN: token for access to the generic administrative API
- PASSPHRASE: token to decode the encrypted private keys in the database (needs to match with the same PASSPHRASE of the issuer)

Please note that the StatusList agent does not use a database to store did identifiers or key material. The only key stored is the generic statuslist agent did:web key, which is hosted at the `/.well-known/did.json` endpoint. The key data, including the private key, is stored in a local file, which should be properly protected from prying eyes.

### Key Configuration

The local key file contains key material for the `did:web` implementation:

```json
{
    "name": "did:web:fullname",
    "privateKeyHex": "hex encoded private key material",
    "type": "key type, one of Secp256r1, Secp256k1, Ed25519, RSA"
}
```

Generate the appropiate private key hex material separately. You can use the included `generateKey` script for that:

```bash
npm run key Ed25519
```

which generates a Ed25519 private key in hex encoded format and prints it to the console. Copy this into the `privateKeyHex` attribute.

Please note that the `name` field in the key configuration specifies the `did:web` and as such contains a DNS name that must match the DNS name of the environment. If this does not match, add a reverse proxy configuration for the well-known path on the actual domain of the `did:web` to the statuslist agent well-known path.

Alternatively, a combination of `APP_KEY` and `APP_DID` can be used to directly set the key material from the environment. 

Additionally, if the statuslist agent is combined with the veramo-issuer implementation, the `APP_KEY` environment variable can be set to a did or alias into the `identifier` table of the veramo-issuer application, allowing the statuslist agent to use the same key material.

### StatusList configuration

Statuslists are configured in the `conf/lists` directory using a separate configuration file for each list.

```json
{
    "name": "path name for this statuslist, excluding the initial slash",
    "tokens": ["array of allowed administrative bearer tokens for admin api"],
    "size": <numeric value of the number of bits, in steps of 8, greater or equal to 131072>,
    "bitSize": <optional size of each reserved bit, 1 by default>,
    "purpose": "list purpose, one of revocation, suspension, message or any business case specific value",
    "type": "type of this implementation".
    "messages": [<optional list of status list messages according to the BitstringStatusList definition>]
}
```

The implementation `type` can be one of the following:

- `BitstringStatusList`: generate credentials and output following the W3C BitstringStatusList definition
- `statuslist+jwt`: generate credentials and output following the IETF Status Token List definition
- `StatusList2020`, `RevocationList2020`, `SuspensionList2020`, `StatusList2021`, `RevocationList2021`, `SuspensionList2021`: use the older version of the W3C BitstringStatusList definition

The main difference between the BitstringStatusList definition and its older versions are the multibase-encoded token list. The newer version prefixes it with a 'u' to indicate the string contains a base64-url-non-padded encoded byte array. The older versions also only allow a bitsize of 1 in the definition.

## Endpoints

The statuslist agent the following endpoints:

- `GET /.well-known/did.json`: endpoint to serve the DIDDocument of the `did:web` key implementation (if a did:web is implemented)
- `GET /<statuslist-name>/<index>`: endpoint to retrieve the statuslist VC containing the statuslist encodedList data
- `POST /<statuslist-name>/api/index`: reserve a bit on this status list
- `POST /<statuslist-name>/api/revoke`: revoke or unrevoke a status of a status list element
- `POST /<statuslist-name>/api/status`: set the new status of a status list element
- `GET /<statuslist-name>/api/status/<list index>/<element index>`: get the status value of a status list element

### Reserving an element

`POST /<statuslist-name>/api/index`

Request object:

```json
{
    expirationDate: <string date/time representation YYYY-MM-DD HH:ii:ss>
}
```

Response object:

```json
{
    "index": <element index>,
    "purpose": <configured status list purpose>,
    "size": <total bit size>,
    "id": <unique URI for this bit>,
    "url": <status list JWT URL>
}
```

This call reserves a random element on the status list. If the status list is too full, a new list with a new index is automatically created. The default status of the new element is `0/false/unset/unrevoked`. The total bit size is the number of elements multiplied by the status list bit size, which is `1` by default.

Example response:

```json
{
    "index": 73124,
    "list": 1,
    "type": "BitstringStatusList",
    "credentialStatus": {
        "id": "http://example.com/statlist/1#73124",
        "type": "BitstringStatusListEntry",
        "statusListIndex": 73124,
        "statusListCredential": "http://example.com/statlist/1",
        "statusPurpose": "revocation"
    }
}
```

```json
{
    "index": 73124,
    "list": 1,
    "type": "statuslist+jwt",
    "credentialStatus": {
        "idx": 73124,
        "uri: "http://example.com/statlist/1"
    }
}
```

```json
{
    "index": 73124,
    "list": 1,
    "type": "BitstringStatusList",
    "credentialStatus": {
        "id": "http://example.com/statlist/1#73124",
        "type": "BitstringStatusListEntry",
        "statusListIndex": 73124,
        "statusListCredential": "http://example.com/statlist/1",
        "statusPurpose": "message",
        "statusSize": 2,
        "statusMessage": [
            {"status": "0x0", "message": "undefined"},
            {"status": "0x1", "message": "suspended"},
            {"status": "0x2", "message": "revoked"},
            {"status": "0x3", "message": "temporarily_revoked"},
        ]
    }
}
```

The `statusMessage` field is set using the `messages` option in the list definition. If no messages are supplied, the agent generates a list containing only `undefined` entries to comply with the requirement that messages must be set for any list with a bitsize > 1.

The `credentialStatus` attribute can be inserted directly into the credential that requires this status information. For IETF Status Token List implementations, this would be a `status` claim containing a `status_list` attribute with this information:

```json
{
    "status": {
        "status_list": {
            "idx": 121,
            "uri": "https://example.com/list/2"
        }
    }
}
```

For the W3C types, it would be a `credentialStatus` attribute, of which there can be several:

```json
{
    "credentialStatus": [{
        "id": "http://example.com/statlist/1#73124",
        "type": "BitstringStatusListEntry",
        "statusListIndex": 73124,
        "statusListCredential": "http://example.com/statlist/1",
        "statusPurpose": "revocation"
    },{
        "id": "http://example.com/stat2list/11#3212",
        "type": "BitstringStatusListEntry",
        "statusListIndex": 3212,
        "statusListCredential": "http://example.com/stat2list/11",
        "statusPurpose": "message",
        "statusSize": 2,
        "statusMessage": [
            {"status": "0x0", "message": "undefined"},
            {"status": "0x1", "message": "suspended"},
            {"status": "0x2", "message": "revoked"},
            {"status": "0x3", "message": "temporarily_revoked"},
        ]
    }]
}
```

### Revoking an element

`POST /<statuslist-name>/api/revoke`

Request object:

```json
{
    list: <satus list credential URL>,
    index: <element index>,
    status: <string value: revoked or unrevoked>
}
```

Response object:

```json
{
    "status": <status change indication>
}
```

The `list` value must be the `url` value from the reservation step. This must match the `statuslist-name` as present in the API path.
The `status` field is a text field containing the actual text `revoked`, or anything else (for `unrevoked`).

This sets the value of the element to `1` (`revoked`) or to `0` (`unrevoked`).

The response indicates if the element value has changed. If it changed, the result value is returned as a string value (`REVOKED`, `UNREVOKED`). If it did not change, the `status` value is `UNCHANGED`.

Example Response:

```json
{
    "status": "REVOKED"
}
```

This interface is usable for status lists of bit size 1. The endpoint below can be used for statuslists of any size, including 1.

### Setting element values

`POST /<statuslist-name>/api/status`

Request object:

```json
{
    list: <statuslist credential URL>,
    index: <element index>,
    status: <integer status value>,
    mask: <optional mask value>
}
```

Response object:

```json
{
    "status": <status change indication>
}
```

The `list` value must be the `url` value from the reservation step. This must match the `statuslist-name` as present in the API path.
The `status` field is an integer to which the new status of the list element must be set. An optional `mask` value can be passed to only set specific bits of the list element and keep other bits unchanged. By default the `mask` will cover all bits.

The response indicates if the element value has changed (`CHANGED`) or not (`UNCHANGED`).

Example Response:

```json
{
    "status": "CHANGED"
}
```

### Retrieving a single bit status

`GET /<statuslist-name>/api/status/<list index>/<element index>`

This is a convenience method to determine the state of a specific element index in the bitstring list. This value can also be determined by parsing the bitstring credential.

`<list index>` is the numeric index of the status list. This index is returned in the call to reserve a bit above. It is also the last path element of the `statuslist credential uri` as present in the credential status claim. The `<element index>` is of course the numeric index of the status list element.

Response object:

```json
{
    "status": <numeric or textual status>
}
```

The response status is `REVOKED` or `UNREVOKED` for statuslists with a bit size of 1. `REVOKED` indicates a value of `1` and `UNREVOKED` a value of `0`.

For statuslists with a larger bit size, the `status` response field is an integer value representing the bit element status value.

### Statuslist Credentials

The credential request interface returns a JWT depending on the configured type of the statuslist.

`GET /<statuslist-name>/<index>`

Example:

```shell
curl http://example.com/statuslist/1
```

The IETF Token Status List returns a JWT with a `status_list` claim:

```json
{
    status_list: {
        bits: <bit size of this list>,
        lst: <encoded status>
    }
}
```

The `encoded status` is a base64url encoded, zlib compressed representation of the bit string content.

The W3C implementations return a Virtual Credential JWT with a `credentialSubject` claim:

```json
{
    type: ['VerifiableCredential', <status list credential type>],
    credentialSubject: {
        id: <list URI>,
        type: <relevant type string>,
        statusPurpose: <purpose description>,
        encodedList: <encoded status>
    }
}
```

The 'old' W3C StatusList implementation has credential type 'StatusListCredential'. The `credentialSubject` type can be anything from `StatusList2020`, `SuspensionList2020` to `RevocationList2021`, etc. The `encodedList` is a base64url encoded gzip compressed representation of the bit string content.

The W3C BitstringStatusList implementation has credential type 'BitstringStatusListCredential'. The `credentialSubject` type should be `BitstringStatusList`. The `encodedList` is a multibase base64url encoded gzip compressed representation of the bit string content. It is very similar to the W3C StatusList value, but preceded by the multibase `u` prefix to indicate the base64url encoding. The spec suggests a base58btc encoding can also be used, which would have a `z` prefix. This implementation only uses the base64url encoded version.

# Changelog / Release Notes

| Version | Commit  | Date       | Comment             |
| ------- | ------- | ---------- | ------------------- |
|         | a2c4cbb | 2025-11-12 | Implementation of encoded private keys. When using the functionality to use the same database as the veramo-issuer, make sure to configure the same `PASSPHRASE` as the veramo-issuer |

Commit message:

Clearing tables when the BEARER_TOKEN is empty to enforce file based configurations

README.md, after:

# statuslist-agent

The StatusList Agent serves status-lists according to the following specifications:

- IETF Token Status Lists: <https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/draft-ietf-oauth-status-list/11/>
- W3C BitstringStatus: <https://www.w3.org/TR/vc-bitstring-status-list/>
- W3C StatusList: <https://github.com/w3c/vc-bitstring-status-list> (an older version of the above)

The agent connects to a PostGreSQL database to potentially store the revocation or suspension state of arbitrary credentials (not implemented yet).

## Installation

Install the agent using yarn:

```bash
yarn install
```

Then configure the tool using the supplied `.env.example`. The following options are supported:

- DB_HOST: database host
- DB_USER: database user
- DB_PASSWORD: database user password
- DB_NAME: database name
- DB_SCHEMA: schema name
- KEY_FILE: local file defining the status agent did:web key data
- PORT: port to listen to
- LISTEN_ADDRESS: interface to listen to
- BASEURL: base url for the agent
- APP_KEY: key-type + private key for the agent key, OR a did or alias into the database identifier table
- APP_DID: statuslist agent did name, if APP_KEY represents the key-type + private key
- BEARER_TOKEN: token for access to the generic administrative API
- PASSPHRASE: token to decode the encrypted private keys in the database (needs to match with the same PASSPHRASE of the issuer)

Please note that the StatusList agent does not use a database to store did identifiers or key material. The only key stored is the generic statuslist agent did:web key, which is hosted at the `/.well-known/did.json` endpoint. The key data, including the private key, is stored in a local file, which should be properly protected from prying eyes.

### Key Configuration

The local key file contains key material for the `did:web` implementation:

```json
{
    "name": "did:web:fullname",
    "privateKeyHex": "hex encoded private key material",
    "type": "key type, one of Secp256r1, Secp256k1, Ed25519, RSA"
}
```

Generate the appropiate private key hex material separately. You can use the included `generateKey` script for that:

```bash
npm run key Ed25519
```

which generates a Ed25519 private key in hex encoded format and prints it to the console. Copy this into the `privateKeyHex` attribute.

Please note that the `name` field in the key configuration specifies the `did:web` and as such contains a DNS name that must match the DNS name of the environment. If this does not match, add a reverse proxy configuration for the well-known path on the actual domain of the `did:web` to the statuslist agent well-known path.

Alternatively, a combination of `APP_KEY` and `APP_DID` can be used to directly set the key material from the environment. 

Additionally, if the statuslist agent is combined with the veramo-issuer implementation, the `APP_KEY` environment variable can be set to a did or alias into the `identifier` table of the veramo-issuer application, allowing the statuslist agent to use the same key material.

### StatusList configuration

Statuslists are configured in the `conf/lists` directory using a separate configuration file for each list.

```json
{
    "name": "path name for this statuslist, excluding the initial slash",
    "tokens": ["array of allowed administrative bearer tokens for admin api"],
    "size": <numeric value of the number of bits, in steps of 8, greater or equal to 131072>,
    "bitSize": <optional size of each reserved bit, 1 by default>,
    "purpose": "list purpose, one of revocation, suspension, message or any business case specific value",
    "type": "type of this implementation".
    "messages": [<optional list of status list messages according to the BitstringStatusList definition>]
}
```

The implementation `type` can be one of the following:

- `BitstringStatusList`: generate credentials and output following the W3C BitstringStatusList definition
- `statuslist+jwt`: generate credentials and output following the IETF Status Token List definition
- `StatusList2020`, `RevocationList2020`, `SuspensionList2020`, `StatusList2021`, `RevocationList2021`, `SuspensionList2021`: use the older version of the W3C BitstringStatusList definition

The main difference between the BitstringStatusList definition and its older versions are the multibase-encoded token list. The newer version prefixes it with a 'u' to indicate the string contains a base64-url-non-padded encoded byte array. The older versions also only allow a bitsize of 1 in the definition.

## Endpoints

The statuslist agent the following endpoints:

- `GET /.well-known/did.json`: endpoint to serve the DIDDocument of the `did:web` key implementation (if a did:web is implemented)
- `GET /<statuslist-name>/<index>`: endpoint to retrieve the statuslist VC containing the statuslist encodedList data
- `POST /<statuslist-name>/api/index`: reserve a bit on this status list
- `POST /<statuslist-name>/api/revoke`: revoke or unrevoke a status of a status list element
- `POST /<statuslist-name>/api/status`: set the new status of a status list element
- `GET /<statuslist-name>/api/status/<list index>/<element index>`: get the status value of a status list element

### Reserving an element

`POST /<statuslist-name>/api/index`

Request object:

```json
{
    expirationDate: <string date/time representation YYYY-MM-DD HH:ii:ss>
}
```

Response object:

```json
{
    "index": <element index>,
    "purpose": <configured status list purpose>,
    "size": <total bit size>,
    "id": <unique URI for this bit>,
    "url": <status list JWT URL>
}
```

This call reserves a random element on the status list. If the status list is too full, a new list with a new index is automatically created. The default status of the new element is `0/false/unset/unrevoked`. The total bit size is the number of elements multiplied by the status list bit size, which is `1` by default.

Example response:

```json
{
    "index": 73124,
    "list": 1,
    "type": "BitstringStatusList",
    "credentialStatus": {
        "id": "http://example.com/statlist/1#73124",
        "type": "BitstringStatusListEntry",
        "statusListIndex": 73124,
        "statusListCredential": "http://example.com/statlist/1",
        "statusPurpose": "revocation"
    }
}
```

```json
{
    "index": 73124,
    "list": 1,
    "type": "statuslist+jwt",
    "credentialStatus": {
        "idx": 73124,
        "uri: "http://example.com/statlist/1"
    }
}
```

```json
{
    "index": 73124,
    "list": 1,
    "type": "BitstringStatusList",
    "credentialStatus": {
        "id": "http://example.com/statlist/1#73124",
        "type": "BitstringStatusListEntry",
        "statusListIndex": 73124,
        "statusListCredential": "http://example.com/statlist/1",
        "statusPurpose": "message",
        "statusSize": 2,
        "statusMessage": [
            {"status": "0x0", "message": "undefined"},
            {"status": "0x1", "message": "suspended"},
            {"status": "0x2", "message": "revoked"},
            {"status": "0x3", "message": "temporarily_revoked"},
        ]
    }
}
```

The `statusMessage` field is set using the `messages` option in the list definition. If no messages are supplied, the agent generates a list containing only `undefined` entries to comply with the requirement that messages must be set for any list with a bitsize > 1.

The `credentialStatus` attribute can be inserted directly into the credential that requires this status information. For IETF Status Token List implementations, this would be a `status` claim containing a `status_list` attribute with this information:

```json
{
    "status": {
        "status_list": {
            "idx": 121,
            "uri": "https://example.com/list/2"
        }
    }
}
```

For the W3C types, it would be a `credentialStatus` attribute, of which there can be several:

```json
{
    "credentialStatus": [{
        "id": "http://example.com/statlist/1#73124",
        "type": "BitstringStatusListEntry",
        "statusListIndex": 73124,
        "statusListCredential": "http://example.com/statlist/1",
        "statusPurpose": "revocation"
    },{
        "id": "http://example.com/stat2list/11#3212",
        "type": "BitstringStatusListEntry",
        "statusListIndex": 3212,
        "statusListCredential": "http://example.com/stat2list/11",
        "statusPurpose": "message",
        "statusSize": 2,
        "statusMessage": [
            {"status": "0x0", "message": "undefined"},
            {"status": "0x1", "message": "suspended"},
            {"status": "0x2", "message": "revoked"},
            {"status": "0x3", "message": "temporarily_revoked"},
        ]
    }]
}
```

### Revoking an element

`POST /<statuslist-name>/api/revoke`

Request object:

```json
{
    list: <satus list credential URL>,
    index: <element index>,
    status: <string value: revoked or unrevoked>
}
```

Response object:

```json
{
    "status": <status change indication>
}
```

The `list` value must be the `url` value from the reservation step. This must match the `statuslist-name` as present in the API path.
The `status` field is a text field containing the actual text `revoked`, or anything else (for `unrevoked`).

This sets the value of the element to `1` (`revoked`) or to `0` (`unrevoked`).

The response indicates if the element value has changed. If it changed, the result value is returned as a string value (`REVOKED`, `UNREVOKED`). If it did not change, the `status` value is `UNCHANGED`.

Example Response:

```json
{
    "status": "REVOKED"
}
```

This interface is usable for status lists of bit size 1. The endpoint below can be used for statuslists of any size, including 1.

### Setting element values

`POST /<statuslist-name>/api/status`

Request object:

```json
{
    list: <statuslist credential URL>,
    index: <element index>,
    status: <integer status value>,
    mask: <optional mask value>
}
```

Response object:

```json
{
    "status": <status change indication>
}
```

The `list` value must be the `url` value from the reservation step. This must match the `statuslist-name` as present in the API path.
The `status` field is an integer to which the new status of the list element must be set. An optional `mask` value can be passed to only set specific bits of the list element and keep other bits unchanged. By default the `mask` will cover all bits.

The response indicates if the element value has changed (`CHANGED`) or not (`UNCHANGED`).

Example Response:

```json
{
    "status": "CHANGED"
}
```

### Retrieving a single bit status

`GET /<statuslist-name>/api/status/<list index>/<element index>`

This is a convenience method to determine the state of a specific element index in the bitstring list. This value can also be determined by parsing the bitstring credential.

`<list index>` is the numeric index of the status list. This index is returned in the call to reserve a bit above. It is also the last path element of the `statuslist credential uri` as present in the credential status claim. The `<element index>` is of course the numeric index of the status list element.

Response object:

```json
{
    "status": <numeric or textual status>
}
```

The response status is `REVOKED` or `UNREVOKED` for statuslists with a bit size of 1. `REVOKED` indicates a value of `1` and `UNREVOKED` a value of `0`.

For statuslists with a larger bit size, the `status` response field is an integer value representing the bit element status value.

### Statuslist Credentials

The credential request interface returns a JWT depending on the configured type of the statuslist.

`GET /<statuslist-name>/<index>`

Example:

```shell
curl http://example.com/statuslist/1
```

The IETF Token Status List returns a JWT with a `status_list` claim:

```json
{
    status_list: {
        bits: <bit size of this list>,
        lst: <encoded status>
    }
}
```

The `encoded status` is a base64url encoded, zlib compressed representation of the bit string content.

The W3C implementations return a Virtual Credential JWT with a `credentialSubject` claim:

```json
{
    type: ['VerifiableCredential', <status list credential type>],
    credentialSubject: {
        id: <list URI>,
        type: <relevant type string>,
        statusPurpose: <purpose description>,
        encodedList: <encoded status>
    }
}
```

The 'old' W3C StatusList implementation has credential type 'StatusListCredential'. The `credentialSubject` type can be anything from `StatusList2020`, `SuspensionList2020` to `RevocationList2021`, etc. The `encodedList` is a base64url encoded gzip compressed representation of the bit string content.

The W3C BitstringStatusList implementation has credential type 'BitstringStatusListCredential'. The `credentialSubject` type should be `BitstringStatusList`. The `encodedList` is a multibase base64url encoded gzip compressed representation of the bit string content. It is very similar to the W3C StatusList value, but preceded by the multibase `u` prefix to indicate the base64url encoding. The spec suggests a base58btc encoding can also be used, which would have a `z` prefix. This implementation only uses the base64url encoded version.

# Changelog / Release Notes

| Version | Commit  | Date       | Comment             |
| ------- | ------- | ---------- | ------------------- |
|         |         | 2025-11-19 | Clearing configuration tables when `BEARER_TOKEN` is empty, enforcing file based configurations. This does not clear any related list tables, so any existing list whose configuration is removed is retained and will 'pop up' if the configuration is reinstated |
|         | a2c4cbb | 2025-11-12 | Implementation of encoded private keys. When using the functionality to use the same database as the veramo-issuer, make sure to configure the same `PASSPHRASE` as the veramo-issuer |
